# _The Life You Can Save_

## Notes for _The Life You Can Save_ by Peter Singer

[Jacob Sandlund][1]
May 2020

This was an impactful book on the duty to give to those in extreme poverty for anyone living in the affluent parts of the world. Its message was clear: we can end poverty if everyone does their part in donating a substantial amount more than we currently are. I found the book shaking me out of complacency, but also laying on too much guilt and too much burden making it a difficult read.

## Notes

The book begins with some facts. Extreme poverty has been on the decline for the last several decades, but despite that, the average person believes the problem is getting worse. Our countries don’t give nearly as much to the poorer nations as people think (official aid by the USA is 0.17% of gross national income), and most of that goes to domestic issues that have a much smaller cost effectiveness in terms of lives that can be saved or substantially improved. This section was short, but facts appear again throughout the book and in a later section titled “The Facts about Aid”.

Following this Singer discusses reasons why people object to giving. He responds to arguments of moral relativism (that everyone is entitled to their own sense of right and wrong when it applies to charity), libertarianism (I won’t bother you if you don’t bother me), and objections such as we’re giving enough already, it’s in our nature to only care for those around us, and more. Next the book discusses human psychology and how it’s impeding our generosity. Some of the points are how we feel it’s hopeless to make a difference, how we’re much more compelled to help an individual person rather than a large number presented as a statistic, how we’re more concerned with our kin, town, and nation.

In the section covering facts about aid, Singer covers what forms of charity are the most effective in terms of lives saved or quality-of-life-affecting disabilities treated. Some examples are deploying bug nets to reduce the chance of getting malaria (which kills 435,000 or more per year, mostly children), performing surgeries for women with obstetrical fistulas (a condition caused by injury during labor creating internal connections that lead to incontinence), and promoting healthy behavior by broadcasting the symptoms for common diseases that should trigger people to see a doctor. He also goes over a number of bad examples, like the ice bucket challenge that raised awareness and money to fight ALS, a disease affecting fewer than 20,000 in the US each year. Later in this section he also covers ways aid can be improved. One proposal is for charities to commit to following the evidence of what works instead of championing a particular solution. Evidence Action was one such charity that cut a program that gave loans and travel subsidies to farmers during the off season, which despite  initially showing promise was found not to scale well.

To end the book, Singer addresses the question of how much we should give. He begins by sharing some examples of people who went to extraordinary measures to help. Some donated kidneys, some gave half of their income or more, some dedicated their lives to working to help the poor. One example was Paul Farmer, who after visiting Haiti and meeting a doctor who was about to return to America after a one year stay, was compelled to become a doctor himself after the shock of hearing this doctor say he couldn’t wait to get back to America.

The final chapter of the book ends with a realistic standard of giving that is much more feasible than the standards to which the people in the anecdotes and the author himself adhere. The standard asks the reader to give around five percent of income every year, weighted so that the richest of the rich give 50 percent, while earners in the top half but not top quarter give only one percent.

## Review

The foreword’s statement, “I’ve never looked at it _that_ way before”, is a fitting response to this book’s strikingly different viewpoint. To see someone articulate how differently we can be living in order to help those way less fortunate than ourselves is a refreshing alternative to society’s materialism and focus on the self. The ethical standard he upholds is provocative: to view every expenditure as a lost opportunity to save or dramatically improve a life is a remarkable ethical code to follow. While the paragraphs that follow present a number of shortcomings, the overall message of the book—that we should be doing more to help those in the most need—is one that must be heard.

The strength of his ethical standard, while noble, becomes tiring over the course of the book. While having the moral purity to make challenging statements is commendable, it is daunting to imagine living by the highest version of what he’s proposing. If a social media phenomenon to raise awareness on a rare disease could have been better targeted on saving the lives of children in poor countries, how many social media phenomena do nothing charitable at all? If $700 concert tickets could have paid for a surgery that repairs a women’s fistula, should seeing a concert for $100 produce 1/7th the guilt?

The biggest improvement this book needs is one mostly of reorganization. While not disorganized, the way he structures the book as a whole, and locally in a number of small sections, puts the arguments in a way that is guaranteed to lose some readers. On the level of the whole book, wouldn’t it be better to propose the more reasonable standard of 5% or so at the beginning, that way readers can feel that these anecdotes of people dedicating their lives to this cause are meant as inspiration rather than to guilt them into a difficult lifestyle?

For the smaller sections, Singer is constantly waiting until the end to reveal his take on something. It becomes exhausting, and I found myself wanting him to state upfront what his views were on the next topic he’s introducing. In “Evaluating What Works” he discusses several charity initiatives, and only after spending a few paragraphs describing how an initiative works and how it came about, he would end with either “but actually it didn’t work”, or “we need more charities like this.” In a longer section describing the Millennium Challenge Corporation and its effort to couple aid to institutional reform in the countries receiving funds, one wonders the whole way through whether he will say that this was a good idea to improve these nations or that this was a bad idea that left people in countries with corrupt uncooperative governments without the aid they need. He ends with a short paragraph that doesn’t clearly state where he draws the line, but does at least acknowledge that there’s some value in getting governments to reform in ways that would help their citizens. Putting that claim in the beginning would have alleviated some of the mental exertion required in suspending judgment until the end.

Another possible problem is Singer’s narrow moral viewpoint, that is squarely in the liberal camp discussed in Jonathan Haidt’s _The Righteous Mind_. In that book, Haidt proposes six moral pillars that make up the foundation of human morals: Care/harm, Liberty/oppression, Fairness, Loyalty, Authority, and Sanctity. Liberals are only concerned with the first three, and chiefly the care/harm foundation. When Singer argue that it is outdated to care about family and country well above the needs of those in the poorer places of the globe, he is addressing the care/harm pillar and ignoring the loyalty one altogether. For conservatives and readers from different cultures, this might not fit with their moral sense of the world.

Finally, although the book is premised on giving to those in extreme poverty, much of the substance of the book’s arguments on personal giving is about charity overall. Singer makes many rational arguments about how X cause is more effective in terms of the number of lives saved. While there is certainly more of a gap in need to give to extremely poor countries than to other causes, his arguments put quantity way above quality. There are many ways in which people can help make the world a better place, and saving more lives isn’t the only one. It’s tremendously important to do more in that regard, but he could treat other efforts less disparagingly.

## Personal takeaway

Even just beginning the book, I was realizing how complacent I had become in my own giving, and how the concerns of those in need hasn’t been a thought I’ve had in daily life. I started thinking of expenses I could cut, like choosing cheaper cosmetics, or even considering canceling my Spotify subscription and relying on my record collection except for the occasional month of new music exploration. Before the end of the book, I realized I had gone too far. I even reacted in an opposite way and decided to pay for a whole year of Amazon Music Unlimited for higher quality audio. Music is after all, something I cherish highly, and the annoyance of having to cancel and renew a plan just to save tens of dollars a year is not at all worth it. I think that’s one of the concerns about this book, that it places too much emphasis on a lifestyle change and leaves the more effective strategy of pledging to give an adequate but reasonable amount to the end.

Gripes aside, the book prompted me to make the pledge and give a percentage of my income every month, through GiveWell. I feel good that I’m doing something to help make the world a better place. And who knows, maybe the examples of cutting expenses can help me save more and amass a fortune to give away at the end of my life!

[1]:	https://jacobsandlund.com